So we are moving into public session now.
We get a strange one before.
Yeah, I was actually wondering
who he was when she didn't introduce him.
Fine. Thank you so much, David, for your submission.
Uh, we have 10 minutes with you, so, um,
it's up to you how you want to use this time.
If you want to speak to your submission, start with that
and there might be questions from members. Thank you.
Sure. Koto.
Uh, my name's David Haynes
and I represent the Internet Service Providers Association.
Uh, our association, um, works
to promote the interests of our last count, 38 members,
uh, to help them provide the best possible service
to their customers around the country.
Um, our submission was quite short and simple.
It covered, um, uh,
disputes being able to be resolved simply.
Um, uh, mentioned a access to properties so
that our members can, can, um, conduct installations easily.
Uh, the telecommunications development
levy being set fairly.
Uh, and then we talked about the role
of the Commerce Commission and
that's probably the one point I'll,
I'll dwell on a little bit.
Um, so to summarize, um, our, our submission, uh,
in the bill, it raises a $50 million figure, um, uh,
for turnover to join to make it compulsory
to join an industry dispute resolution service.
Uh, and we support that.
Uh, the background there is that in the past, many
of our members have been a member of
a telecommunications dispute resolution service
and gave up being a member
because they never had any disputes.
And then there was some, um, some problem with the, um,
the commerce commissioner
who wanted everyone to join a scheme.
So having a, a turnover figure there,
we think is appropriate.
Uh, and, uh, the telecommunication services listed in,
sorry about the details sec.
The proposed section 2 4 0 A four B, which lists the sort
of telecommunication services, um,
that accounted in that figure.
And we think that's quite important
because lots
of our members have revenue from other sources
other than those services.
Um, we support the, uh, the bill, um,
maintaining the existing rights of property access.
Uh, we, uh, we agree
that the telecommunications development levy should be set
by regulation, uh, rather than, um, than in, in the act.
Uh, and we agree that the minister should only be able
to recommend an increase in the levy
after consulting levy payers.
But the one, one thing I would like
to talk about a bit more, um,
is the role of the Commerce Commission.
And, um, in, uh,
in the bill it talks about the, the three other, um,
local fiber companies, uh, being able
to change their constitutions so that, um,
they would give a, a role to the Commerce Commission.
Um, uh,
but it seems a bit back to front in that, um,
the Commerce Commission would only have that role
if the Minister of Finance had given their approval.
And it seems to us that, um, for local fiber companies
to change their constitution
and then run the risk of the Minister
of Finance saying, no, that was a waste of time.
Change it back again, is a bit back to front.
Uh, and that if the local fiber companies wanted
to change their constitutions, perhaps the way
to do it would be for them to, uh, and,
and give a job to the Commerce Commission would be for them
to send that proposal to the minister, um, uh, so
that he could veto it ahead of time and,
and save them changing their constitution
and then having to change it back again.
Um, so in, that's a summary of our submission.
Um, thank you very much for your time, Kira.
Thank you. Um, members questions.
It looks like that was really comprehensive.
Thank you so much, David, for your contribution.
Yeah, Kira, thank you. Thank you.
Uh, the next submitter is Utilities Disputes Limited, uh,
the in person.
Mm-hmm. Anybody here in the room from utilities disputes?
No. Um, can we check if they're outside please? Yeah.
Somebody coming here, here is, oh, hello.
Um, this, the utilities disputes. It is. Yeah.
Please come on the table. Ah, you
Team passed.
Thank you so much for your submission.
We have 10 minutes with you
and you know how it works. Thanks. Sure.
Thank you to the committee for the
opportunity to present today.
Um, my name is Neil Mal.
I'm the CEO and Commissioner of Utilities Disputes.
I've got Paul Bias, who's our legal and policy officer.
Uh, so utilities dispute a little bit of that background.
We are, I'd say we're probably the largest independent
dispute resolution, certainly in utilities,
but in across all of the sort of financial
and other schemes that operate in New Zealand.
Um, this year we, we resolving around 14,000 complaints.
We'll be helping 14,000 kiwis with the inquiries.
Um, we operate an ombudsman commission model.
We're not-for-profit, an independent board,
and we're reviewed every year and on a five year basis.
Um, and we deliver schemes in energy is about
95%, but we also do water.
Uh, we also do broadband on shared property
and we do a telecommunication scheme for contact energy.
So I wanted to really just tease out probably two
or three points in the submissions, um, that we've made.
And the first one is, um, a little bit, I suppose, uh,
is more sort of a broader one than the technical one.
It's, I think this is a, a bit of a missed opportunity
to make sort of really fundamental changes
for consumers in telecommunications.
I think the preferred model would be a mandatory single
operating scheme for all consumers
that all telcos were required to join.
Um, we think that operates effectively
and it's been shown as best practice across sectors.
Uh, we also, um, we will join
and become an industry dispute resolution scheme under the
remit of Commerce Commission that the changes go through,
but we don't think that will necessarily address the
underlining sort of flaws in the current model
that exist for consumers.
And we've got data in, in our submission, which shows
the current sole industry dispute resolution scheme
is not receiving the kind of level
of complaints you would expect when you look at overseas.
Also, if you compare, um, the numbers we have
for a very small portion of the market,
so we cover 110,000 consumers, our acQuire's complaints
outstrip what they receive when they cover 6 million.
And if you look at
what the Commerce Commission has published in 2023 about
how contact energy has compared, it's not shown
as underperforming compared to the other telcos.
So that's one of the points we wanted to stress.
Um, the other one is the revenue cap.
Um, we don't see a need
to limit access to dispute resolution based on
the wealth of the company.
In fact, from my experience working with,
we see in fact the opposite.
It's generally the smaller to medium operators
that have less customer service, less sophisticated billing,
less ability to deal with vulnerable consumers and hardship.
So those are the companies
and customers that we think need to have access
to dispute resolution, and there is a way to tackle that
that does not pass on exorbitant costs to consumers.
You're looking at very small annual costs
to consumers if it's done effectively.
Um, and the final thing I wanted to just sort of touch on,
uh, is really one of the underlining purposes
of the cabinet paper was to increase the emergence
of dispute resistance schemes outside of the telco sector.
We think in the current setup
where you have an industry body telecommunications forum,
which acts as a quasi regulator that mandates
that if you want a seat at that table,
which telcos probably generally will,
then you have no choice as to
what does resolution scheme you join.
You are compelled to join TDR.
If that's not addressed,
then you're not going to achieve that purpose.
And Paul will talk a little bit about some
of the technical aspects around
how you can probably pull those levers,
but I still think that's one of the, um,
underlining problems.
We would happily, um, you know, submit ourselves to any kind
of review transparency, um, and examination of what we do.
But we think actually if you took it up a level,
you could improve consumer protection
for everyone by making some changes.
Um, I'll hand over to Paul. Thank you.
Um, we just would like to raise one, uh,
main technical issue and it's the use of the term
and, uh, of industry retail service quality code.
Um, this term is, is defined in section five,
and it means a code established by the forum
or what we know is TCF.
Um, that term is used three times in the bill when it talks
about the purpose of the industry dispute resolution scheme.
Um, the scope of the complaints
that the industry dispute resolution scheme may consider
and the scope of, um, ComCom review.
Um, ComCom will review the industry dispute resolution
schemes, um, by use of this term, it's inserting, um,
TCF codes, um, into the industry dispute resolution schemes.
And it could be misinterpreted.
Um, it could, um, infer that, um, um, forum members, um,
can become, um, members of these other schemes.
Um, um, it doesn't seem to capture the purpose
that you could still make that link between the forum
and these new new bodies.
Um, what we think,
and the intention of the bill was to open up, um,
dispute resolution to other schemes
and what we think how this will work.
And it's, um, in the ris, um,
there'll be new industry dispute resolution schemes
and they'll have their own retail service quality codes.
And it's also a defined term, but it's much more open.
So if the commission hasn't issued a commission code,
these new entities will have their own codes.
Um, you know, talking about things, we have one here,
you know, about advertising, about looking
after vulnerable consumers.
Um, they'll, they'll work out their own ways
and, um, that will be the focus of those schemes
and, um, their signatories will be bound by that.
However, that term isn't found in the purpose section
or the scope of the complaints,
or even in terms of ComCom review.
Um, so we think that could lead to a mismatch
and, uh, um, make the legislation of its past vulnerable to,
uh, misunderstanding.
Um, we do think there's one solution.
I mean, there could be a couple of solutions actually,
but perhaps an easy solution
to consider is just replacing the term
industry retail service quality code with the,
the more wider term retail service quality code.
Um, and that way, um, the, it'll be clear what the industry
that these new bodies can consider.
It will be clear the scope
of com com can review those codes.
Um, it'll be clear that the purpose
of each industry dispute resolution scheme is to consider,
um, commission codes
and any retail services quality codes that they,
our main technical issue.
Um, I'd like briefly just to talk about B spa.
Um, and we support the B SPA changes.
Um, um, it's worked well.
These changes will bring certainty that,
you know, it'll be ongoing.
Um, we also support the amendments allowing a request
to be made by persons who do not have retail contracts such
as developers and landlords.
Um, we don't see this, um, at this stage as an issue
because there'll be no obstacle
to affected persons having all the rights that they do now,
um, to object to any, um, installation, installation.
So those are our two main, um, statutory points.
Happy to take any Questions.
Oh, great. Thank you. Uh, questions members,
um, Dr. David Lewison,
Uh, we have heard that the, um, gap that you are,
you are seeing, um, it's not actually severely affected
by disputes and that, uh, there are none
or very little or very few.
So I'm assuming that you're talking about the WIS
and the like in terms of trying
to catch all which the wi hearing you want to do.
Uh, sorry, I dunno about, so in terms of the,
you mean the small numbers of complaints coming to TDR
that it's not an issue?
Yeah, uh, well I think actually
if you see the experience we've got in three years,
compare contact with 90% of the others, you'll see
that it's out of kilter.
So I think there is an issue if you compare it to Australia
as well, the telecommunications Osman
and the percentage of complaints you get per telco
customer, I think it is an issue.
I think one of the latest reports has said the average
person can spend up to 10 hours trying
to resolve a complaint with a telco.
So I, I also look, I come back to, I think it's a healthy
sort of, uh, metric for an industry
to be getting complaints, you know, within regional bounds
because they're an independent feedback loop
and you've seen sectors where there's been a lack
of complaints in the specific area over time masking a real,
um, problem for consumers
and it's led to inquiries and those things.
So my view would be you should be looking at
what the average level
of complaints you get in Telco in Australia,
you should be looking at what we get.
You should be looking at energy and other utilities
and there should be a fairly even baseline.
Um, and when the TDR was independently reviewed by Cameron,
Ralph Cory in 2021
and in 2024,
they both raised the fact there is a very low level
of complaints and that is something they need to work on.
Um, I mean we all, we all struggle for awareness,
so that's one of the barriers.
So you are providing a different
reason for the low level of
Yeah, I, I, I think if you look at how a scheme operates
and how, um, how they're judged,
actually there's general metrics.
You say that we should be getting a level of complaints
because it's a healthy, it's showing accessibility
and it's showing that Kiwis
and consumers are able to go somewhere independent
to raise concerns.
So as a committee we should be exploring this.
I, I think so. Look, it is going beyond those changes,
but I, I think there's a lot of data saying lack
of complaints means there's a lack of effective channel
For consumers.
Yep. Mm. Alright, that's good.
Thank you so much for your submission. Thank you.
Uh, next we have Max Marshall. Mm-hmm.
Max here in person.
He's supposed to be, but we are running a little bit early,
so, and it'd be really Ann.
Yep. Do
we have Alex Stewart here?
Yep. Please come forward, we can start with you. Thank you.
Thank you Alex, for your submission.
We have 10 minutes with you and you've seen
how it works. Thank you.
Perfect. Q Committee.
Uh, Madam Chair, thank you for the opportunity
to appear before you here today.
My apologies for the earlier mix up.
This is my first time submitting, so yeah.
Um, so my name's Alex Stewart, I'm 21
and I run Wombat net,
which is a regional wireless provider covering about, uh,
seven and a half thousand square
kilometers of rural Wellington.
I started this company when I was 14
and I've been operating it
for seven years now without any direct government funding.
My written submission goes into more detail,
but I wanted to use the time that I have today
to offer some specific practitioner context on clause eight.
So overall, I support the bill.
The minister needs flexibility to adjust the levy
as the market changes, and that makes sense,
but it does raise a question which is
flexibility in which direction.
I ask that because as you'll know,
the levy funds things like the blind low vision relay
service, but it was primarily intended to fund connectivity
and non-urban areas where the market alone wouldn't deliver.
Whether because it's too costly to build
or too expensive for the end user.
And when I look at rural New Zealand right now,
the barrier isn't technology.
I can deploy multi gigabit wireless speeds today.
The main barrier is capital. And here's what I mean by that.
Large providers often have diversified balance sheets
so they can borrow against their urban assets
to fund rural builds,
but regional providers like Wombat net
don't necessarily have that.
We have concentrated infrastructure towers on leased rural
land and banks call that illiquid.
Unfortunately they won't lend against it.
So we're not unbankable
because we're unprofitable,
rather we are structurally excluded from capital markets
and this is becoming urgent.
The FII report, which the Commerce Commission published last
October, describes the domestic wildlife sector as subscale
and warns of a quote, material risk
of rapid market concentration in rural areas.
Stalin's New Zealand revenue went from 73 million
to over a hundred million in a single year, and Amazon's LEO
and a ST are both coming soon
if domestic providers continue exiting
as has been documented, we lose the infrastructure diversity
and resilience that comes with having local networks.
Now I understand the specific clause I
mentioning, uh, sorry, I understand.
The specific clause is about collection and not allocation.
Uh, but modernizing collection while leaving allocation
unchanged or without direction,
is like upgrading the milking shed when you've got no cows.
The two are connected.
So I'm not asking the committee to amend anything
outside scope, and I'm not suggesting the levy become a
financial vehicle for small providers.
What I am suggesting is that collection
and allocation are connected
and equally important if the,
if the bill gives the minister flexibility on connection,
uh, collection, it's worth noting
that flexibility only delivers outcomes.
If allocation frameworks address the actual barriers in the
market right now, that barrier is capital access.
Happy to take questions.
Very good, thank you. Um, questions, uh, Dr. De,
So, Um, your, your, um,
service is a wisp wireless
internet service provider, correct?
One of them? Yes. Yes.
We, we provide other services,
but that's how you could call us. Yeah. So
All of your friends are not using lower low
Orbit? No,
no, no. Right.
Okay. That's all I need to know.
Um, Scott Willis, Um, we know
that rural connectivity is a real problem.
And so are you hearing the same sort
of issues from other other providers who,
who are doing contact and think uni uniform down south?
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. How, what is the, what's the landscape?
Well, um, wombat was a member of, uh, Wispa, uh, for,
for a period of time and they were supposed to be, um,
lobbying on behalf of the industry.
Um, that wasn't really occurring.
So now, now that's why I'm here doing that.
Um, but what we found is that there is a bit
of a unlevel playing field
because of the providers
that have received government funding such as RBI
and RCU, um, you know, that's, that's allowed them to, um,
build their balance sheets through that funding
or, you know, those grants, um, to enable them
to access further capital.
Um, so I don't think it's a, um, a widespread problem.
There are a whole lot of other issues,
but that's, you know, opening a can of worms.
I don't wanna, don't wanna do here today,
but I will say that, um, it has been raised with me
that it is an issue, um, in, in other areas of the country,
especially when you're thinking about, um,
these providers moving towards fiber based networks.
Um, having that access to capital is, is really important.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Okay. Picked up
Vanessa. Uh, so
in that matter, regarding, um, capital access,
you said that there's an issue about the way
that banks classify your, um, your lease assets.
If, um, if there was a way that we could, um, change the way
that they viewed that rather than accessing say a fund
or anything else like that, would that be,
would that answer that question? Uh,
Potentially. Um,
I mean, it might be a bit of a long shot,
but, uh, what, what I've sort of envisioned, um, was,
was some kind of loan guarantee scheme so that mm-hmm.
Um, the government could take on that risk
because I, I think that the banks are seeing it as a,
you know, sort of risky thing with, um, there being new,
you know, services entering the market.
Uh, but potentially, yeah.
Okay. Thank you. Okay, good.
Thank you so much for Perfect. Thank you.
I will check we have, um, next,
So we'll just try to give him the call.
He hasn't answered, but um, he was originally scheduled
for eight 40 and I have a feeling that he's gotten back up,
so I might suggest moving into private
session now and then coming.
Alright, sounds good. Thank you so much.